---
arm_hardware: true
cmake_plat: rpi3
xcompiler_arg: -DAARCH32=1
platform: Raspberry Pi 3B/3B+
arch: ARMv8A
virtualization: ARM HYP
iommu: "No"
soc: BCM2837
cpu: Cortex-A53
Status: Unverified
Contrib: Data61
Maintained: seL4 Foundation
SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-SA-4.0
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2020 seL4 Project a Series of LF Projects, LLC.
---

# Raspberry Pi 3 Model B and Model B+

This is an experimental port and is not guaranteed to work.

## Hardware

[RPI-3B-V1_2-SCHEMATIC-REDUCED.pdf](https://www.raspberrypi.org/documentation/hardware/raspberrypi/schematics/RPI-3B-V1_2-SCHEMATIC-REDUCED.pdf)

|Feature |Part |Datasheet |
|-|-|-|
|USB+ETH |SMSC LAN9514|[9514.pdf](http://ww1.microchip.com/downloads/en/DeviceDoc/9514.pdf)|
|SoC |BCM2837 | |

## Running seL4 on the Raspberry Pi 3B/3B+

Please also find a feature article going on seL4 the Raspberry Pi 3
[on our blog](https://research.csiro.au/tsblog/sel4-raspberry-pi-3/) (and check out the rest of the blog too!)

## Serial connection

Serial TX and RX are located at GPIO pins 14 and
15 respectively (See Hardware schematic above).

## Reset

In order to do a soft reset of the Raspberry Pi without having to power-cycle it, you can short
the jumper marked "RUN" between the expansion header and USB sockets.

## U-Boot

In order to obtain a U-Boot binary that disables caching, you can either
compile U-Boot from source yourself, or you can
**[use this prebuilt U-Boot binary image which already works](https://sel4.systems/Info/Docs/u-boot-working-rpi3-32bit-v2017.11.bin)**.

The instructions for building U-Boot depend on whether you want to run 32-bit or 64-bit seL4.

Building for 32-bit:
```bash
git clone https://github.com/u-boot/u-boot.git u-boot
cd u-boot
make CROSS_COMPILE=arm-linux-gnueabi- rpi_3_32b_defconfig
make CROSS_COMPILE=arm-linux-gnueabi-
```

Building for 64-bit:
```bash
git clone https://github.com/u-boot/u-boot.git u-boot
cd u-boot
make CROSS_COMPILE=aarch64-linux-gnu- rpi_3_b_plus_defconfig
make CROSS_COMPILE=aarch64-linux-gnu-
```

After building U-Boot, you should see a file `u-boot.bin`.

This will enable you to get the most up-to-date U-Boot which will boot
seL4 on the RPi3 successfully.

Building u-boot using configuration `rpi_3_3b_defconfig` is going to
produce an image that can boot seL4 on the Raspberry Pi Model 3B and
3B+. Unfortunately for the 3B+ tftp boot is not going to work using
this version of u-boot (the `tftp` command will report error
`No Ethernet found`).
In this case you need to build an image specific for the 3B+.
Unfortunately the provided defconfig file for the 3B+ model
(`rpi_3_b_plus_defconfig`) doesn't appear to build correctly.

In order to use tftp boot on a Raspberry Pi Model 3B+, use the
defconfig for the 3B (as described above), then manually change the
`CONFIG_DEFAULT_DEVICE_TREE` parameter in the `.config` from:
```
CONFIG_DEFAULT_DEVICE_TREE="bcm2837-rpi-3-b"
```
to:
```
CONFIG_DEFAULT_DEVICE_TREE="bcm2837-rpi-3-b-plus"
```
Now the generated image should be able to use the on-board
Ethernet device for TFTP.

## SD card setup

The Pi boots from the first FAT32 partition on the
SD card. Where files are specified, they should be located in the root
directory of this partition.

|Stage |Filename |Description |Source|
|-|-|-|-|
|FSBL |- |Mounts SD and loads SSBL |ROM |
|SSBL |bootcode.bin|Loads GPU firmware and boots GPU|<https://github.com/raspberrypi/firmware/tree/master/boot> |
|GPU firmware |start.elf or recovery.elf |Loads CPU bootloader and boots CPU |<https://github.com/raspberrypi/firmware/tree/master/boot> |
|Usually the Linux kernel, but could also be U-Boot |u-boot.bin |U-Boot| You can either [use our prebuilt U-Boot which works](https://sel4.systems/Info/Docs/u-boot-working-rpi3-32bit-v2017.11.bin), or compile your own using the instructions above |
||config.txt|U-Boot parameters |Add enable_uart=1 and kernel=u-boot.bin to the bottom of config.txt (Sample: <http://codepad.org/ykVYFSyP>) |
||uboot.env |U-Boot saved environment |Generated by U-Boot (default environment) bootcmd copied to bootcmd_orig bootcmd and bootdelay removed. You don't need this file when you first set up the SD Card. |

### Config setup

In addition to the above files, the booting process also requires a `config.txt` file that gives parameters to the Raspberry Pi bootloader. More information about the various configj koptions can be found [here](https://www.raspberrypi.com/documentation/computers/config_txt.html).

```
enable_uart=1
kernel=u-boot.bin
```

If you want to boot your Raspberry Pi in 64-bit mode, you will need to add the following line:
```
arm_64bit=1
```

## Getting seL4 onto your Raspberry Pi 3

In this section you should
find the two most convenient methods of getting a kernel image booted on
your RPi3 described. All three methods assume that you have already
built a kernel image using one of our projects---such as seL4Test:

{% include sel4test.md %}

The two methods described here are using the SD card and TFTP.

Both methods require you to use an SD card to provide the RPi3 firmware
with a U-Boot bootloader it can load. The RPi3 doesn't store its
bootloader in flash memory, so it looks for the bootloader on the SD
card. Please see the section above for how to prepare your SD Card for
the base set of requirements; you can glance at the table above to see
the files you'll need and how to obtain them.

### SD Card

Get a micro-SD card ready by getting the base files
copied onto it (See the previous section).

Following this, copy your seL4 image (such as an seL4test image), onto
the SD card in its root directory - that's it. You can now remove the SD
Card from your PC and re-insert it into the RPi3, and power the RPi3 on.

When the RPi3 boots up, be sure to interrupt the boot process and drop
into the U-Boot command prompt. From the U-Boot command prompt, type
something the following: fatls mmc 0. If you don't see your seL4 image
file's name printed out, then you might need to double-check your steps
so far to make sure you didn't forget something along the way. If you
see your file listed, then do something like:
```
fatload mmc 0 0x10000000 sel4test-driver-image-arm-bcm2837
bootelf 0x10000000
```

### TFTP

Be sure you've set up the internal SD card with the required files for
U-Boot and the RPi3 firmware (consult the table above). Then make
certain that you've started up a TFTP server with your seL4 image being
served by that TFTP server. From there:
```
usb start
dhcp
tftp 0x10000000 <YOUR_TFTP_SERVER_IP_ADDRESS>:sel4test-driver-image-arm-bcm2837
bootelf 0x10000000
```

To use static IP instead of DHCP, use:
```
usb start
setenv ipaddr <RPI_IP_ADDRESS>
setenv serverip <YOUR_TFTP_SERVER_IP_ADDRESS>
tftp 0x10000000 sel4test-driver-image-arm-bcm2837
bootelf 0x10000000
```
